Computer Vision using Pre-Trained CNN's for Estimation of Age and Prediction of Gender

Age and Gender are one of the primary parameters in identification of a user. Its uses are important in field of Security, Social Networking etc. In the recent times with increasing demand for managing security aspects, profiling of users on physical parameters like age, gender, emotion with minimal information is challenging. Social Networking and e-commerce companies invest huge amount of time and resources to estimate Age and Gender to provide appropriate suggestions of products and services to their users.The progress in the field of computer vision has been amplified with introduction neural networks. Convolutional Networks have introduced a new paradigm in the field of image analysis. Profiling of users, using images or video footages is can be achieved with the help of image processing and neural networks.In my current project I exploit few of the pre-trained convolutional Neural Networks built for ImageNet competition to classify age and gender. Facial features are found to be ideal inputs as facial skin is exposed in general cases which can produce a clear distinction to map a function for the requirement. This function is approximated using a Convolutional operation at various layers in a neural network. Each layer has specific weights trained to identify certain features in an image. The weights in an ImageNet used in the following project are trained on datasets having millions of images for 1000 different objects. The different layers are trained to identify simple to complex features in an image. The features range from simple like edges and corners in an image to complex objects in final layers like limbs of different dog species. Since the initial layers identify basic features we exploit this property to extract features of a face image from the pretrained weights of the network. Such collection of features is called the feature map. Post extraction of feature maps a Feed Forward Neural Network (FFNN) is trained to classify age and gender based on a labeled dataset. To have a sufficient training data for FFNN I use feature maps extracted from a publicly available face dataset. I have used WIKI dataset which has age and gender labels. These images are cropped to contain only faces in them. Images which have incorrect labels have been discarded to improve the accuracy of the network. Later these are fed to a CNN to generate features. These features are used to train and test the accuracy FFNN with a validation procedure.
